src/ts-envs/README.md, before:

No-nonsense help with ENVironmental variable processing for your Typescript project.


[Accessing environment variables](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v8.x/docs/api/process.html#process_process_env)  within a node app is straightforward, 
but as an app ages and grows, small problems crop up. This is a small
solution to those small problems.

## Problems:

- When setting up a project in a new environment, things break. It can be obvious, or it can be an exception that is thrown after the app has been running some time. It can be a bit of a treasure hunt to find and fix these.
- When you start working on a project, incomplete or outdated documentation may mean it's hard to get a project working.
- When an environment variable is used in multiple parts of the code, it may be used inconsistently. Maintaining and updating default values may be error prone.

## Features:

- detect missing configurations in one place
- provide documentation about what is expected
- provide config defaults for optional variables
- coerce to specific (Typescript) type

## Usage

### `configure`
This package replaces the normal uses of `process.env` with an alternative. To create it, call `configure` providing metadata about each of the expected variables. This is done with an object, where the keys are the variable names, and the metadata attributes are:
- `description` (required): a textual description of the variable
- `type` (default "string"): `string`, `boolean` or `integer`
- `required`: `true` or `false`
- `default`: a default value, if the variable is not required

Here is an example:
```ts
import {configure} from "ts-envs";

export const envs = configure({
  hostname: {
    description: 'Hostname to be reflected in logs',
    required:     false,
    default:     'www.example.com'
  },
  db_url: {
    description: 'A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495',
    required:     true,
  },
  port: {
    type:        'integer',
    description: 'Port to listen for HTTP requests',
    required:     true
  },
  verbose: {
    type:        'boolean',
    description: 'Log more stuff',
    required:     false,
    default:      false
  }
})
```
In most cases, you will export this configuration and access it throughout your 
code where you need access to environment variables, using it instead of 
`process.env` everywhere.

### Access
Access the variables works like `process.env`:

```ts
const hostName: string  = envs.hostname
const dbUrl:    string  = envs.db_url
const port:     number  = envs.port
const verbose:  boolean = envs.verbose
```
There are a few improvements to `process.env`:
- In Typescript, variables are of the specified type
- Variable name are automatically converted to uppercase before extraction from `process.env`. For example, `envs.hostname` will grab the value of `process.env.HOSTNAME`. Javascript code does not need to have bulky upper-cased strings uglifying the code (although you are free to use uppercase if you prefer). 
- If the variable is not required and missing, the default value will be returned.
- If the variable is required and missing, or of the wrong type, an exception will be thrown. With manual code, these cases go undetected.

The `envs` object also has additional features:

### `envsValid(): boolean`

It is valuable to detect and notify the programmer that not all the configured variables are present. It's even better to do so early in the run cycle, so the app doesn't fail deep inside. Note: `configure` above does _not_ perform check variables, and instead you must call `envsValid()`. 

This method returns `true` if the all the variables are set, and false if not. Typical usage:
```ts
if (!envs.envsValid())
  process.exit(1)
```
As a side effect, if there is a problem, it outputs to the `console` an easy-to-understand error message:
```
Environmental variable errors!
Missing environment variable "DB_URL"
Description: A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495

Missing environment variable "PORT"
Description: Port to listen for HTTP requests
...
```
This output is followed by a complete "help text" (below) that describes all the variables.

### `envs.helpText: string`

`envs.helpText` describes all of the variables, based on the configuration. This is used for the error message above, but you might want to include it in other help information or documentation. It looks like (although, obviously, varies depending on the variables):

    E N V I R O N M E N T   V A R I A B L E S
    
    Required environment variables:
    DB_URL        A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495
    PORT          Port to listen for HTTP requests
    
    Optional environment variables [default value]:
    HOSTNAME      Hostname to be reflected in logs ["www.example.com"]

### `env.errors: Array<string>`

`env.errors` is an array of strings spelling out the errors. This is accessed automatically in `envsValid` above, but they are made available for any other usage.

## Non-features:

This library does not aim to:
- Create some hierarchy out of your environment variables, based on their names.
- Allow you to create aliases of environment variables, so they have multiple names.
- Parse complex values, like XML or JSON, included within environment variables.
- Reading alternate `.env` files, like `dotenv`.
- Use some third-party schema definitions, like zod or joi. (We're Typescript only!)

## Similar Projects (if you don't like this one)

- https://www.npmjs.com/package/znv: Parses using zod types. 
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/env-var: Verification, sanitization, and type coercion for environment variables in Node.js and web applications. Supports TypeScript! Somewhat deeper features, but slightly fussier syntax. 
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@sadams/environment: Similar, with custom parsers.
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/chickenv: Detects missing variables
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/common-env: Lots of options. Aliases?
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@trenskow/config: Infers a hierarchy, and has a little bit of validation
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/castenv: Casts process.env variables directly, based on heuristics
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tonbul/env-parser: explicit conversion functions
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/getenv2: Uses joi for types, and also defaults per environment
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/strict-env-conf: Similar motivation; builds hierarchy of values
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/safe-env-vars: Verification build on `get`.

## NOTES

- Created package using https://medium.com/cameron-nokes/the-30-second-guide-to-publishing-a-typescript-package-to-npm-89d93ff7bccd

## TODOs

- Add verification function, to make sure the value is acceptable. Wouldn't do any sort of conversion, just check and throw exception. This code would just call it. Allow this to support more complicated things
- Support "coercion" function, so complex values, like JSON, or encoded values can be used. I'd need to do this in a type-safe way.
- automatically verify on configuration

Commit message:

reverse validate behavior-- now it is automatic

src/ts-envs/README.md, after:

No-nonsense help with ENVironmental variable processing for your Typescript project.


[Accessing environment variables](https://nodejs.org/dist/latest-v8.x/docs/api/process.html#process_process_env)  within a node app is straightforward, 
but as an app ages and grows, small problems crop up. This is a small
solution to those small problems.

## Problems:

- When setting up a project in a new environment, things break. It can be obvious, or it can be an exception that is thrown after the app has been running some time. It can be a bit of a treasure hunt to find and fix these.
- When you start working on a project, incomplete or outdated documentation may mean it's hard to get a project working.
- When an environment variable is used in multiple parts of the code, it may be used inconsistently. Maintaining and updating default values may be error prone.

## Features:

- detect missing configurations in one place
- provide documentation about what is expected
- provide config defaults for optional variables
- coerce to specific (Typescript) type

## Usage

### `configure`
This package replaces the normal uses of `process.env` with an alternative object. It's called `envs` in this documentation (but you can call it whatever you want). To create it, call `configure` providing metadata about each of the expected variables. 
Here is an example:
```ts
import {configure} from "ts-envs";

export const envs = configure({
  hostname: {
    description: 'Hostname to be reflected in logs',
    required:     false,
    default:     'www.example.com'
  },
  db_url: {
    description: 'A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495',
    required:     true,
  },
  port: {
    type:        'integer',
    description: 'Port to listen for HTTP requests',
    required:     true
  },
  verbose: {
    type:        'boolean',
    description: 'Log more stuff',
    required:     false,
    default:      false
  }
})
```
In most cases, you will export this configuration and access it throughout your 
code where you need access to environment variables, using it instead of 
`process.env` everywhere. 

The configuration for each variable name is called "metadata", and the metadata attributes are:
- `description` (required): a textual description of the variable
- `type` (default "string"): `string`, `boolean` or `integer`
- `required`: `true` or `false`
- `default`: a default value, if the variable is not required

### Access
Access the variables in `envs` just like `process.env`:

```ts
const hostName: string  = envs.hostname
const dbUrl:    string  = envs.db_url
const port:     number  = envs.port
const verbose:  boolean = envs.verbose
```
There are a few improvements to `process.env`:
- In Typescript, variables are of the specified type
- Variable name are automatically converted to uppercase before extraction from `process.env`. For example, `envs.hostname` will grab the value of `process.env.HOSTNAME`. Javascript code does not need to have bulky upper-cased strings uglifying the code (although you are free to use uppercase if you prefer). 
- If the variable is not required and missing, the default value will be returned.
- If the variable is required and missing, or of the wrong type, and there was no previous validation, an exception will be thrown. With manual access to `process.env`, these cases go undetected.

## Additional Tweaks

The one function, `configure`, above, is all the API that is needed to access your validated, typed environment variables! If you want to dig deeper, the `envs` object has additional features:

### `envsValid(): boolean`

It is valuable to detect a misconfigured environment and notify the programmer, and it's even better to do so early in the run cycle. To this aim, `configure` does this validation when it is called. If you want to do validation elsewhere, or in more detail, this default can be suppressed and validation done manually:

1. Turn off the default validation by passing `{ validate: false }` as a second parameter to `configure`.

2. Do your own manual validation by calling `envs.envsValid()`. This method returns `true` if the all the variables are set, and false if not. Typical usage:
```ts
if (!envs.envsValid())
  process.exit(1)
```
As a side effect, if there is a problem, `envsValid` outputs to the `console` an easy-to-understand error message:
```
Environmental variable errors!
Missing environment variable "DB_URL"
Description: A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495

Missing environment variable "PORT"
Description: Port to listen for HTTP requests
...
```
This output is followed by a complete "help text" (below) that describes all the variables.

### `envs.helpText: string`

`envs.helpText` describes all of the variables, based on the configuration. This is used for the error message above, but you might want to include it in other help information or documentation. It looks like (although, obviously, varies depending on the variables):

    E N V I R O N M E N T   V A R I A B L E S
    
    Required environment variables:
    DB_URL        A connection to the database, eg. sqlite3://localhost:3495
    PORT          Port to listen for HTTP requests
    
    Optional environment variables [default value]:
    HOSTNAME      Hostname to be reflected in logs ["www.example.com"]

### `env.errors: Array<string>`

`env.errors` is an array of strings spelling out the errors. This is accessed automatically in `envsValid` above, but they are made available for any other usage.

## Non-features:

This library does not aim to:
- Create some hierarchy out of your environment variables, based on their names.
- Allow you to create aliases of environment variables, so they have multiple names.
- Parse complex values, like XML or JSON, included within environment variables.
- Reading alternate `.env` files, like `dotenv`.
- Use some third-party schema definitions, like zod or joi. (We're Typescript only!)

## Similar Projects (if you don't like this one)

- https://www.npmjs.com/package/znv: Parses using zod types. 
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/env-var: Verification, sanitization, and type coercion for environment variables in Node.js and web applications. Supports TypeScript! Somewhat deeper features, but slightly fussier syntax. 
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@sadams/environment: Similar, with custom parsers.
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/chickenv: Detects missing variables
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/common-env: Lots of options. Aliases?
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@trenskow/config: Infers a hierarchy, and has a little bit of validation
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/castenv: Casts process.env variables directly, based on heuristics
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tonbul/env-parser: explicit conversion functions
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/getenv2: Uses joi for types, and also defaults per environment
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/strict-env-conf: Similar motivation; builds hierarchy of values
- https://www.npmjs.com/package/safe-env-vars: Verification build on `get`.

## NOTES

- Created package using https://medium.com/cameron-nokes/the-30-second-guide-to-publishing-a-typescript-package-to-npm-89d93ff7bccd

## TODOs

- Add verification function, to make sure the value is acceptable. Wouldn't do any sort of conversion, just check and throw exception. This code would just call it. Allow this to support more complicated things
- Support "coercion" function, so complex values, like JSON, or encoded values can be used. I'd need to do this in a type-safe way.
- automatically verify on configuration
